# Overview

> A quick overview on the basics of JavaScript

## Introduction

- JavaScript is a light weight, cross-platform, Object-oriented programming language.
- JavaScript is one of the three core technologies of web development.
  - Client Side: JavaScript was traditionally used on Browsers.
  - Server Side: Node.js made it possible to use JS even on server side.
  - Platform: Electron made it possible to write cross platform desktop apps.
- JavaScript and Java are not same.
- Modern JavaScript also known as ECMAScript or ES6 and ES6+.

## Variable

- Variables are just like a container which can store something in it.
- `var`,`let`,`const` are the keywords used to **initialize or declare a variable**.
- **_Scope :_** `let` and `const` has **block level scope** whereas `var` has the **functional scope**.
- `var` supports the hoisiting.
- The value assigned to `const` **cannot be _re-assigned_** and the variable initialized using `const` **cannot _re-defined_**.

```JavaScript
// keyword identifer = value;
let year = 2018;
const NAME = 'JavaScript'; // constants are UPPERCASE by convention but it's not mandatory
var codeEditor = 'VSCode';
```

## Data types

- Every language has some built-in data types these need not be the same for all programming languages.
- Data types can be classified into two types in JavaScript. They are
  1. Primitives
  2. Non-primitives (reference type)

| Primitives | Non-primitives |
| ---------- | -------------- |
| Number     | Object         |
| String     |                |
| Boolean    |                |
| Null       |                |
| Undefined  |                |
| Symbol     |                |
|            |                |

- Primitives can be compared by value.
- Non-primitives are compared by reference but not by value.
- JavaScript doesn't have any type checking, It is also known as **dynamically typed language**.
  _NOTE :_ Once go through the [**Operators**](https://www.w3schools.com/jsref/jsref_operators.asp).

## Conditionals

- Want to perform certain tasks only if it satisfies a specified condition
- Different conditional statements in js are
  1. if-else
  2. if-else-if
  3. switch

```JavaScript
if (condition) {
    code in this block runs only when the given condition is true
} else {
    this code block runs when condition is false
}
```

## Loops

- Loops offer a quick and easy way to perform something repeatedly.
- Different loop statements in js are
  1. for loop
  2. while loop
  3. do-while loop
- There is something we have to know in loops are `break` and `continue` statements
- **break :** It is used to terminate the loop
- **continue :** It is used to restart the loop

```JavaScript
// for loop
for (IntialValue; condition; InitialValueUpdater) {
    code goes here
}

// while loop
while (condition) {
    code goes here
}

// do-while loop
do {
    code goes here
} while (condition);
```

## Functions

- Function declaration and definition , function Expression
- function
- class
- object

### Glossary

```JavaScript
// Declaration and Initialization(Automatically allocates the data for specified variable in memory)
let a;
// Assignment
a = 98;
```
